---
layout: page
title: About
date: 2014-09-29 17:05:08+00:00
slug: about
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

The Herschel Extragalactic Legacy Project (HELP)'s main objective is to provide
a rich new data set characterising the physical properties of hundreds of
thousands of distant galaxies. This will bring together a vast range of data
from many different astronomical observatories. The focus is on the images
produced by the ESA’s Herschel mission. These images chart the star formation
enshrouded in dust, and our work will allow us to unlock the full potential of
those images.

![herschel_space_observatory_large]({{site-url}}/assets/images/herschel_space_observatory_large.jpg)

## Project Goals

One of the great challenges of astrophysics is to understand the evolution of
galaxies across cosmic time.

Galaxies found with a large number of companions in the nearby Universe are very
different from those that are found in isolation from other galaxies.  To
understand the origin of this difference, we must understand a wide range of
environments in the early Universe to determine how galaxies have evolved in
these environments.  Using a number of different telescopes, we can probe
different physical processes.

A number of astronomical observatories have been undertaking large scale
programmes to chart out large areas of the distant universe.  As many of these
projects will be completed in the next four years, the data from these new
projects is ripe to be compiled into a single, larger data set.  Our project
brings together key members of the teams conducting these new projects in order
to combine the data together in a coherent manner.  This combination of multiple
data sets will allow us to gain new information about the physical properties of
the galaxies (for instance, the stellar mass or star formation rates of these
galaxies).

ESA's Herschel Space Observatory (pictured above) has a unique role to play in
this multi-wavelength data set, as it is able to see the signatures of star
formation through layers of dust.  The presence of dust acts as a barrier to
optical telescopes, so the ability of Herschel to see through the dust allows us
to see the star formation that would otherwise be hidden.  One of the major
goals of the Herschel mission was to explore the star formation history of the
early Universe by constructing a large extragalactic survey of the galaxy
population.  However, the images produced by Herschel are relatively low
resolution, so galaxies can blur together.  In order to disentangle the light
produced from the individual galaxies, images from other observatories with
higher resolution can be used.

We intend to develop new tools to apply advanced statistical techniques to
overcome the limitations of the poor resolution of the Herschel imaging, and
allow them to be used to their full potential by astronomers in Europe and
around the world.

We will be able to provide a census of the galaxy population in the distant
Universe, along with their distribution throughout the three dimensional space
we observe.  This will be a large resource for anyone wishing to study the
Universe at early times, similar to the sort of resource the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey has provided for the nearby Universe.  HELP should provide a lasting
legacy of these ground and space based surveys.

## Video

Professor Seb Oliver explains how the Herschel Space Observatory has grown our
understanding of the distant Universe using far-infared (redder-than-red) light
from galaxies.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/SBFYnlYY8ik" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Contact

If you would like more information about the data available within HELP, or
would like to contribute data to the project, please get in touch.

A good first contact point is our Project Manager, Louise Winters; l (dot)
winters (at) sussex (dot) ac (dot) uk.
