---
date: 2016-05-23 12:48:05+00:00
layout: post
slug: a-cosmic-census-of-the-galaxies-in-the-distant-universe
title: A Cosmic Census of the Galaxies in the Distant Universe
categories:
- Meetings
---

#### June 20-24, 2016

##### Lorentz Center, Leiden, Netherlands

Meeting url: [here](http://www.lorentzcenter.nl/lc/web/2016/759/info.php3?wsid=759&venue=Oort)

Understanding the evolution of galaxies across cosmic time is one of the great
challenges of astrophysics. Galaxies found with many companions today are very
different from those that are isolated. To understand how this came to be, we
need to map a statistically representative range of environments in the early
universe using telescopes that probe different physical processes.

![S1636-LCP-A-Cosmic-03]({{site-url}}/assets/images/s1636-lcp-a-cosmic-03.png)

The Herschel Extragalactic Legacy Project (HELP), funded by the European
Commission Research Executive Agency, will address this by bringing together the
many ambitious survey programmes carried out, or currently underway, at the
major astronomical observatories. The radio surveys, in particular those from
the LOFAR facility led from the Netherlands, are particularly important as they
probe the star formation and active galactic nuclei activity in the distant
Universe and will be the pathfinders for the future observations with the Square
Kilometre Array.

The foundation of HELP is data from the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Herschel
space mission. Exploration of the star formation history of the universe, using
extragalactic surveys, was a major goal of the Herschel mission. However, the
Herschel images have a relatively low resolution. By combining the data from
many observatories, utilizing advanced statistical techniques and developing new
tools HELP intends to overcome the limited resolution and enable astronomers in
Europe to realize Herschel’s full potential. This will also provide crucial
insight for exploitation of the Japanese/European SPICA mission which has
significant Dutch involvement through the leadership of the SAFARI instrument.
Herschel also has a powerful synergy with the radio surveys by probing the star
formation that has been obscured to conventional telescopes by dust.

HELP also aims to create new standards in delivering value-added, user-friendly,
data and tools. This will enable these wide varieties of data to be used in an
efficient, homogenous and rigorous manner to address fundamental questions about
the statistics of galaxy populations and as a fundamental resource providing
well-defined samples of interesting galaxy populations for follow-up studies by
new facilities such as ALMA.

Our workshop is timed for the midpoint of the HELP project. It will bring
together for the first time the European scientists who are expected to be key
beneficiaries of HELP, with members of the international multi-wavelength survey
teams (including LOFAR) and the core HELP team. Through direct interaction
between the HELP team and the users, HELP can get feedback and make adjustments
to future direction of project so that final data products and tools have the
greatest legacy value possible and thus provide the key tools and data products
to enable European astronomers to understand the growth of galaxies across the
history of the Universe.

The key objectives are to:

  * review the scientific questions that these multi-wavelength datasets need to
  address
  * review the available, ongoing and planned datasets and assess the needs for
  new observations
  * review the different approaches to resolving the Herschel confusion
  challenge
  * compare the methods for modelling the intrinsic physical properties of
  galaxies from their observed photometric properties
  * discuss the requirements for meta data to define the selection effects of
  multi-wavelength survey data to enable the desired statistical studies
  * assess the requirements for tools and delivery of data to best meet the
  needs of the community in addressing the statistical questions.


The Scientific Organizing Committee is:

- Seb Oliver
- Peter Hurley
- Mattia Vaccari
- Huub Rottgering
- Veronique Buat
- Vernesa Smolcic
- Simon Driver
- Brent Groves
- David Elbaz
- Loretta Dunne
